README.md, before:

# Google Drive Automation Actions

Automate Google Drive operations with Python using OAuth2 authentication and Drive Labels API.

A lightweight, framework-free Python toolkit for automating Google Drive operations.

## What are Drive Labels?
**Drive Labels** are metadata tags that you can attach to your Google Drive files to organize and classify them beyond simple folders. Think of them as "sticky notes" with structured data.

-   **Examples**: "Confidentiality" (Public/Internal/Restricted), "Status" (Draft/Final), "Department" (HR/Engineering).
-   **Why use them?**: They allow you to search, filter, and apply policies to files regardless of where they live in your folder structure.
-   **How this tool helps**: This toolkit lets you programmatically **list**, **read**, and **modify** these labels, enabling powerful automation workflows.

## Quick Start

```bash
./setup.sh                                      # Setup virtual environment
source venv/bin/activate && python automations/labels_lister.py  # List labels
```

## Project Structure - **Simple & Direct**

```
drive-automation-actions/
├── automations/
│   ├── labels_lister.py   # Standalone script: lists labels
│   ├── folder_lister.py   # Standalone script: lists files with labels
│   └── label_modifier.py  # Standalone script: modifies labels (names or IDs)
├── utilities.py           # Shared auth & helper functions
├── credentials.json       # OAuth2 client configuration (from Google Cloud Console)
├── token.json            # OAuth2 tokens (auto-generated on first run)
├── requirements.txt      # Dependencies with pinned versions
└── setup.sh             # Environment setup script
```

## Philosophy: **Simple > Complex**

**No frameworks. No inheritance. No abstractions.**
Each automation is a **standalone script** that does one thing well.

## Core Components

### Automations

#### labels_lister.py
- **Purpose**: List all available Drive Labels with full metadata
- **Standalone**: API calls + colored JSON output (uses shared auth)
- **Usage**: `python automations/labels_lister.py`

#### folder_lister.py
- **Purpose**: List files in a folder with their applied labels
- **Features**: Shows label displayNames, field names, and values
- **Usage**: `python automations/folder_lister.py "folder/path"`
- **Optimization**: Caches label catalog (1 API call instead of N)

#### label_modifier.py
- **Purpose**: Apply or update a label on a file
- **Features**: Supports human-readable names for labels, fields, and values (auto-resolves to IDs)
- **Usage**: `python automations/label_modifier.py <file_id> "Label Name" "Field Name" "Value Name"`
- **Example**: `python3.12 automations/label_modifier.py "1zOU5JWp_1lkB93IfDN9c5X95-tcDBxlG" "Clasificación de información/datos" "Categoria" "Información Interna"`

### Utilities (utilities.py)
- `authenticate(scopes)` - Shared OAuth2 authentication logic
- `get_child_folder_id(service, drive_id, parent_id, child_name)` - Find folder by name
- `resolve_path_to_folder_id(service, drive_id, path)` - Navigate folder paths
- `list_files_in_folder(service, drive_id, folder_id)` - List files with pagination
- `get_labels_catalog(labels_service)` - Get all labels metadata (for caching)
- `get_file_labels(drive_service, file_id, labels_catalog)` - Get file labels with displayNames

## Usage Examples

```python
from utilities import resolve_path_to_folder_id, list_files_in_folder

# Use utilities in your own automation scripts
folder_id = resolve_path_to_folder_id(service, drive_id, "Reports/2024")
files = list_files_in_folder(service, drive_id, folder_id)
```

## Setup Requirements

### 1. Google Cloud Project
- **Project ID**: `atomic-elixir-377814`
- **Authentication Method**: OAuth2 User Authentication (not service account)

### 2. OAuth2 Credentials Setup
1. Go to [Google Cloud Console](https://console.cloud.google.com/)
2. Navigate to project `atomic-elixir-377814`
3. Enable APIs: Google Drive API + Drive Labels API
4. Create OAuth2 Client ID (Desktop Application type)
5. Download credentials → Save as `credentials.json` in project root

### 3. Python Environment
Run `./setup.sh` to create isolated virtual environment with dependencies

### 4. First-Time Authentication
- On first script execution, browser opens automatically
- User authorizes access to Google Drive + Labels
- `token.json` generated automatically (contains access + refresh tokens)
- Subsequent runs use `token.json` (no browser required)

## Security

**⚠️ Important: Never commit these files to git:**
- `credentials.json` - Contains OAuth2 client credentials
- `token.json` - Contains user access tokens and refresh tokens

Add them to `.gitignore` to prevent accidental commits.

## Dependencies

- `google-api-python-client==2.182.0` - Core Google API client
- `google-auth==2.40.3` - Authentication framework
- `google-auth-oauthlib==1.2.1` - OAuth2 flow
- `google-auth-httplib2==0.2.0` - HTTP transport
- `pikepdf==9.11.0` - PDF processing utility
- `pygments==2.18.0` - JSON syntax highlighting

## Creating New Automations - **Keep It Simple**

### Pattern: Copy & Modify
1. **Copy** `automations/labels_lister.py`
2. **Modify** the logic for your needs
3. **Run** directly

### Template
```python
"""My automation - does one thing well."""

import sys
import os
sys.path.insert(0, os.path.abspath(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__file__), '..')))

from googleapiclient.discovery import build
from utilities import authenticate

SCOPES = ["https://www.googleapis.com/auth/drive"]  # Add scopes as needed

def my_automation():
    """Do my specific task."""
    creds = authenticate(SCOPES)
    service = build("drive", "v3", credentials=creds)
    # Your logic here
    return {"result": "success"}

if __name__ == "__main__":
    print(my_automation())
```

**That's it.** No inheritance. No abstractions. Just **copy, modify, run**.

Commit message:

Add Drive Labels availability info to documentation

README.md, after:

# Google Drive Automation Actions

Automate Google Drive operations with Python using OAuth2 authentication and Drive Labels API.

A lightweight, framework-free Python toolkit for automating Google Drive operations.

## What are Drive Labels?
**Drive Labels** are metadata tags that you can attach to your Google Drive files to organize and classify them beyond simple folders. Think of them as "sticky notes" with structured data.

-   **Examples**: "Confidentiality" (Public/Internal/Restricted), "Status" (Draft/Final), "Department" (HR/Engineering).
-   **Why use them?**: They allow you to search, filter, and apply policies to files regardless of where they live in your folder structure.

**Availability**: Drive Labels are a Google Workspace feature. They are available on paid Workspace editions that include the Labels service (Business Standard, Business Plus, Enterprise Essentials, Enterprise Standard, Enterprise Plus). They are not available on free consumer Google accounts. An admin must enable the Labels service in the Admin console for the organization.
-   **How this tool helps**: This toolkit lets you programmatically **list**, **read**, and **modify** these labels, enabling powerful automation workflows.

## Quick Start

```bash
./setup.sh                                      # Setup virtual environment
source venv/bin/activate && python automations/labels_lister.py  # List labels
```

## Project Structure - **Simple & Direct**

```
drive-automation-actions/
├── automations/
│   ├── labels_lister.py   # Standalone script: lists labels
│   ├── folder_lister.py   # Standalone script: lists files with labels
│   └── label_modifier.py  # Standalone script: modifies labels (names or IDs)
├── utilities.py           # Shared auth & helper functions
├── credentials.json       # OAuth2 client configuration (from Google Cloud Console)
├── token.json            # OAuth2 tokens (auto-generated on first run)
├── requirements.txt      # Dependencies with pinned versions
└── setup.sh             # Environment setup script
```

## Philosophy: **Simple > Complex**

**No frameworks. No inheritance. No abstractions.**
Each automation is a **standalone script** that does one thing well.

## Core Components

### Automations

#### labels_lister.py
- **Purpose**: List all available Drive Labels with full metadata
- **Standalone**: API calls + colored JSON output (uses shared auth)
- **Usage**: `python automations/labels_lister.py`

#### folder_lister.py
- **Purpose**: List files in a folder with their applied labels
- **Features**: Shows label displayNames, field names, and values
- **Usage**: `python automations/folder_lister.py "folder/path"`
- **Optimization**: Caches label catalog (1 API call instead of N)

#### label_modifier.py
- **Purpose**: Apply or update a label on a file
- **Features**: Supports human-readable names for labels, fields, and values (auto-resolves to IDs)
- **Usage**: `python automations/label_modifier.py <file_id> "Label Name" "Field Name" "Value Name"`
- **Example**: `python3.12 automations/label_modifier.py "1zOU5JWp_1lkB93IfDN9c5X95-tcDBxlG" "Clasificación de información/datos" "Categoria" "Información Interna"`

### Utilities (utilities.py)
- `authenticate(scopes)` - Shared OAuth2 authentication logic
- `get_child_folder_id(service, drive_id, parent_id, child_name)` - Find folder by name
- `resolve_path_to_folder_id(service, drive_id, path)` - Navigate folder paths
- `list_files_in_folder(service, drive_id, folder_id)` - List files with pagination
- `get_labels_catalog(labels_service)` - Get all labels metadata (for caching)
- `get_file_labels(drive_service, file_id, labels_catalog)` - Get file labels with displayNames

## Usage Examples

```python
from utilities import resolve_path_to_folder_id, list_files_in_folder

# Use utilities in your own automation scripts
folder_id = resolve_path_to_folder_id(service, drive_id, "Reports/2024")
files = list_files_in_folder(service, drive_id, folder_id)
```

## Setup Requirements

### 1. Google Cloud Project
- **Project ID**: `atomic-elixir-377814`
- **Authentication Method**: OAuth2 User Authentication (not service account)

### 2. OAuth2 Credentials Setup
1. Go to [Google Cloud Console](https://console.cloud.google.com/)
2. Navigate to project `atomic-elixir-377814`
3. Enable APIs: Google Drive API + Drive Labels API
4. Create OAuth2 Client ID (Desktop Application type)
5. Download credentials → Save as `credentials.json` in project root

### 3. Python Environment
Run `./setup.sh` to create isolated virtual environment with dependencies

### 4. First-Time Authentication
- On first script execution, browser opens automatically
- User authorizes access to Google Drive + Labels
- `token.json` generated automatically (contains access + refresh tokens)
- Subsequent runs use `token.json` (no browser required)

## Security

**⚠️ Important: Never commit these files to git:**
- `credentials.json` - Contains OAuth2 client credentials
- `token.json` - Contains user access tokens and refresh tokens

Add them to `.gitignore` to prevent accidental commits.

## Dependencies

- `google-api-python-client==2.182.0` - Core Google API client
- `google-auth==2.40.3` - Authentication framework
- `google-auth-oauthlib==1.2.1` - OAuth2 flow
- `google-auth-httplib2==0.2.0` - HTTP transport
- `pikepdf==9.11.0` - PDF processing utility
- `pygments==2.18.0` - JSON syntax highlighting

## Creating New Automations - **Keep It Simple**

### Pattern: Copy & Modify
1. **Copy** `automations/labels_lister.py`
2. **Modify** the logic for your needs
3. **Run** directly

### Template
```python
"""My automation - does one thing well."""

import sys
import os
sys.path.insert(0, os.path.abspath(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__file__), '..')))

from googleapiclient.discovery import build
from utilities import authenticate

SCOPES = ["https://www.googleapis.com/auth/drive"]  # Add scopes as needed

def my_automation():
    """Do my specific task."""
    creds = authenticate(SCOPES)
    service = build("drive", "v3", credentials=creds)
    # Your logic here
    return {"result": "success"}

if __name__ == "__main__":
    print(my_automation())
```

**That's it.** No inheritance. No abstractions. Just **copy, modify, run**.
